hi this is david from minute earth and
here's something really strange when
certain spots in Australia and Russia
had the same concentrations of a
particular atom in the air we know that
it will start to rain at a certain spot
in India fifty two days later that seems
both random and absurd
after all Australia and Russia are both
8,000 kilometers away from India and
while the atom in question beryllium 7
appears to make it rain it doesn't
actually have that power in fact it
seems to just hang out in the air the
connection doesn't seem to make any
sense but hundreds of years ago no one
knew what connected a full moon to a
super high tide or what connected
hat-making to insanity these bewildering
connections only made sense once we
figured out the invisible mechanisms
responsible for them gravity and mercury
poisoning and what ties beryllium 7 and
the far-off rains together is an
invisible mechanism called the Hadley
cell Hadley cells are giant cyclical air
patterns that form as hot air rises from
the equator 15 kilometers straight up
and then splits and flows north and
south toward the poles before cooling
colliding with air coming the other way
falling back down to earth and heading
back towards the equator as Hadley cells
cycle they drive all sorts of
large-scale moisture patterns around our
planet including the Asian monsoon
during which 70% of the Indian
subcontinent SAN Yule rain falls and
Hadley cells also drive around random
atoms called beryllium 7 which may not
do anything special but they formed
somewhere special 15 kilometres above
the earth as cosmic ray particles smash
into nitrogen and oxygen atoms to create
beryllium 7 atoms the beryllium then
hitches a ride on the Hadley Express to
the Earth's surface as the Sun moves
over the course of the year the Hadley
cells move with it which means that
during warmer months in the northern
hemisphere there's usually a higher
concentration of beryllium in the air
over Dubna while during warmer months in
the southern hemisphere there's usually
a higher concentration of beryllium in
the air over Melbourne but at a certain
date usually in April the Hadley cells
are lined up such that they deposit
equal concentrations of beryllium at the
surface in both dubna and Melbourne when
that happens we know that almost exactly
seven and a half weeks later they will
drag the monsoon rains across India and
sure maybe this weird predictive power
seems like just a fun party trick but
just like we were able to use our
understanding of gravitational pull to
predict the rise and fall of the ocean
and use our understanding of mercury
toxicity to make hats and lots of other
stuff safer we can actually put our
understanding of Hadley cells to use to
by being able to use our knowledge of
Hadley cell
movement to precisely predict the onset
of the rainy season farmers in the
Indian subcontinent and there are a lot
of farmers there can know precisely when
they should plant their crops to grow as
much food as possible and by doing so
they can feed almost a beryllium
I mean billion people we're able to
measure beryllium seven concentrations
in the air around the world thanks to
the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban
Treaty Organization or CTBT Oh
in order to monitor for illicit nuclear
tests they've set up a series of sensors
in locations around the world that
detect all sorts of radioactive atoms
including naturally occurring ones like
beryllium 7 this work has been mandated
by more than 180 nations and the data
that is collected worldwide is available
to researchers who want to further
expand our knowledge about the planet if
you're interested please contact CTBT
org thanks the CTBT o-- for sponsoring
this video and for helping keep the
world safe from nuclear weapons also
Congrats to our latest caption contest
winner the next image is ready for
awesome caption suggestions from all
levels of patrons at patreon.com slash
minute earth
[Music]